and the Lord spoke
on Mount Sinai speak to the children of
Israel and say to them when you come
into the land which I give you then the
land shall keep a Sabbath to the Lord
six years you shall sow your field and
six years you shall prune your vineyard
and gather its fruit but in the seventh
year there shall be a Sabbath of solemn
rest for the land a Sabbath to the Lord
you shall neither sow your field nor
prune your vineyard what grows of its
own accord of your harvest you shall not
reap nor gather the grapes of your
untended vine for it is a year of rest
for the land and the Sabbath produce of
the land shall be food for you for you
your male and female servants your hired
man and the stranger who dwells with you
for your livestock and the beasts that
are in your land all its produce shall
be for food and you shall count
7/7 of years for yourself seven times
seven years and the time of the seven
Sabbath's of years shall be to you 49
years
then you shall cause the trumpet of the
Jubilee to sound on the tenth day of the
seventh month on the day of atonement
you shall make the trumpet to sound
throughout all your land and you shall
consecrate the fiftieth year and
proclaim Liberty throughout all the land
to all its inhabitants it shall be a
jubilee for you and each of you shall
return to his possession
and each of you shall return to his
family that fiftieth year shall be a
jubilee to you in it you shall neither
sow nor reap what grows of its own
accord nor gather the grapes of your
untended vine for it is the Jubilee it
shall be a holy to you you shall eat its
produce from the field in this year of
Jubilee each of you shall return to his
possession and if you sell anything to
your neighbor or buy from your
neighbor's hand you shall not oppress
one another according to the number of
years after the Jubilee you shall buy
from your neighbor and according to the
number of years of crops he shall sell
to you according to the multitude of
years you shall increase its price and
according to the fewer number of years
you shall diminish its price for he
sells to you according to the number of
the years of the crops therefore you
shall not oppress one another but you
shall fear your God for I am the Lord
your God so you shall observe my
statutes and keep my judgments and
perform them and you will dwell in the
land in safety then the land will yield
its fruit and you will eat your fill and
dwell there in safety and if you say
what shall we eat in the seventh year
since we shall not sow nor gather in our
produce
then I will command my blessing on you
in the sixth year and it will bring
forth produce enough for three years and
you shall sow in the eighth year and eat
old produce until the ninth year until
its produce comes in you shall eat of
the old harvest the land shall not be
sold permanently for the land is mined
for you are strangers and sojourners
with me and in all the land of your
possession you shall grant Redemption of
the land if one of your brethren becomes
poor and has sold some of his possession
and if his redeeming relative comes to
redeem it then he may redeem what his
brother sold or if the man has no one to
redeem it but he himself becomes able to
redeem it then let him count the years
since its sale and restore the remainder
to the man to whom he sold it that he
may return to his possession but if he
is not able to have it restored to
himself then what was sold shall remain
in the hand of him who bought it until
the year of Jubilee and in the Jubilee
it shall be released and he shall return
to his possession if a man sells a house
in a walled city then he may redeem it
within a whole year after it is sold
within a full year he may redeem it but
if it is not redeemed within the space
of a full year then the house in the
walled city shall belong permanently to
him who bought it throughout his
generations it shall not be released in
the Jubilee
however the houses of villages which
have no wall around them shall be
counted as the fields of the country
they may be redeemed and they shall be
released in the jubilee nevertheless the
cities of the Levites and the houses in
the cities of their possession the
Levites may redeem at any time and if a
man purchases a house from the Levites
then the house that was sold in the city
of his possession shall be released in
the Jubilee for the houses in the cities
of the Levites are there possession
among the children of Israel but the
field of the common land of their cities
may not be sold for it is their
perpetual possession if one of your
brethren becomes poor and falls into
poverty among you then you shall help
him like a stranger or a sojourner that
he may live with you take no usury or
interest from him but fear your God that
your brother may live with you you shall
not lend him your money for usury no
lend him your food at a profit I am the
Lord your God who brought you out of the
land of Egypt to give you the land of
Canaan and to be your God and if one of
your brethren who dwells by you becomes
poor and sells himself to you you shall
not compel him to serve as a slave as a
hired servant and a sojourner he shall
be with you and shall serve you until
the year of Jubilee and then he shall
depart from you he and his children with
him and shall return to his own family
he shall return to the possession of his
father's for they are my servants whom I
brought out of the land of Egypt they
shall not be sold
slaves you shall not rule over him with
rigor but you shall fear your God and as
for your male and female slaves whom you
may have from the nations that are
around you from them you may buy male
and female slaves moreover you may buy
the children of the strangers who dwell
among you and their families who are
with you which they beget in your land
and they shall become your property and
you may take them as an inheritance for
your children after you to inherit them
as a possession they shall be your
permanent slaves but regarding your
brethren the children of Israel you
shall not rule over one another with
rigor now if a sojourner or stranger
close to you becomes rich and one of
your brethren who dwells by him becomes
poor and sells himself to the stranger
or sojourn are close to you or to a
member of the strangers family after he
is sold
he may be redeemed again
one of his brothers may redeem him or
his uncle or his uncle son may redeem
him or anyone who is near of kin to him
in his family may redeem him or if he is
able he may redeem himself thus he shall
reckon with him who bought him the price
of his release shall be according to the
number of years from the year that he
was sold to him until the year of
Jubilee it shall be according to the
time of a hired servant for him if there
are still many years remaining according
to them he shall repay the price of his
Redemption from the money with which he
was bought and if there remain but a few
years until the year of Jubilee then he
shall reckon with him and according to
his years he shall repay him the price
of his Redemption he shall be with him
as a yearly hired servant and he shall
not rule with rigour over him in your
sight and if he is not redeemed in these
years then he shall be released in the
year of Jubilee he and his children with
him for the children of Israel are
servants to me they are my servants whom
I brought out of the land of Egypt I am
the Lord your God
[Music]
you